---
title: "Regenerate Custom Procedures for Schema Changes (Transactional)"
description: Regenerate custom transactional stored procedures to reflect schema changes for Transactional Replication.
author: MashaMSFT
ms.author: mathoma
ms.reviewer: randolphwest
ms.date: 04/21/2025
ms.service: sql
ms.subservice: replication
ms.topic: conceptual
ms.custom:
  - updatefrequency5
helpviewer_keywords:
  - "custom procedures [SQL Server replication]"
  - "transactional replication, replicating schema changes"
  - "schemas [SQL Server replication], replicating changes"
monikerRange: "=azuresqldb-mi-current || >=sql-server-2016"
---
# Transactional articles - Regenerate custom procedures to reflect schema changes

[!INCLUDE [sql-asdbmi](../../../includes/applies-to-version/sql-asdbmi.md)]

By default, transactional replication makes all data changes at Subscribers through stored procedures that are generated by internal procedures, for each table article in the publication. The three procedures (one each for inserts, updates, and deletes) are copied to the Subscriber and executed when an insert, update, or delete is replicated to the Subscriber.

When a schema change is made to a table on a [!INCLUDE [ssNoVersion](../../../includes/ssnoversion-md.md)] Publisher, replication regenerates these procedures automatically by calling the same set of internal scripting procedures so that the new procedures match the new schema (replication of schema changes isn't supported for Oracle Publishers).

You can also specify custom procedures to replace one or more of the default procedures. The custom procedures should be changed if the schema change affects the procedure. For example, if a procedure references a column that is dropped in a schema change, references to the column should be removed from the procedure.

There are two ways for replication to propagate a new custom procedure to Subscribers:

- Use a custom scripting procedure to replace the defaults used by replication
- Use a script that contains a new custom procedure definition

## Use a custom scripting procedure to replace the defaults used by replication

When you execute [sp_addarticle](../../system-stored-procedures/sp-addarticle-transact-sql.md), ensure the *@schema_option* `0x02` bit is to `true`.

> [!NOTE]  
> The custom stored procedure definition must be scripted using dynamic Transact-SQL, inside a wrapper stored procedure. This wrapper stored procedure must also include an *@artid* parameter of type **int**, to ensure that it's created on the Subscriber.

Execute [sp_register_custom_scripting](../../system-stored-procedures/sp-register-custom-scripting-transact-sql.md) and specify a value of `insert`, `update`, or `delete` for the *@type* parameter, and the name of the custom scripting procedure for the *@value* parameter.

The next time a schema change is made, replication calls this stored procedure to script out the definition for the new user defined custom stored procedure, and then propagates the procedure to each Subscriber.

### Example

In this example, assume that the Publisher and Subscriber are already configured, and you want to create a custom `delete` stored procedure.

1. On the Subscriber, create a table to showcase the custom delete script.

   ```sql
   USE [SubscriberDB];
   GO

   CREATE TABLE DeleteLogging (id INT PRIMARY KEY);
   GO
   ```

1. Add the article from the Publisher. Note the values of the `@schema_option`, `@ins_cmd`, `@upd_cmd`, and `@del_cmd` parameters:

   ```sql
   USE [PublisherDB];

   EXECUTE sp_addarticle
       @publication = N'PubName1',
       @article = N'Purchases',
       @source_owner = N'dbo',
       @source_object = N'Purchases',
       @type = N'logbased',
       @description = NULL,
       @creation_script = NULL,
       @pre_creation_cmd = N'drop',
       @schema_option = 0x000000000803509F,
       @identityrangemanagementoption = N'manual',
       @destination_table = N'Purchases',
       @destination_owner = N'dbo',
       @vertical_partition = N'false',
       @ins_cmd = N'CALL sp_MSins_dboPurchases',  -- default
       @del_cmd = N'CALL custom_delete',          -- custom
       @upd_cmd = N'SCALL sp_MSupd_dboPurchases'; -- default
   GO
   ```

1. Create a stored procedure that scripts out the `custom_delete` stored procedure you want to use on the Subscriber. This is the wrapper stored procedure, as indicated previously.

   Returning non-zero values from this stored procedure results in `custom_delete` not being created on the Subscriber. The `SELECT` should return the full `CREATE` definition of the stored procedure that will be used on the Subscriber.

   Note the use of the required `@artid` parameter.

   ```sql
   USE [PublisherDB];
   GO

   CREATE OR ALTER PROCEDURE script_custom_delete (@artid INT)
   AS
   BEGIN
       SELECT 'CREATE OR ALTER PROCEDURE custom_delete
                 @pkc1 INT
             AS
             BEGIN
                 INSERT INTO DeleteLogging (id) VALUES (@pkc1)
             END';
       RETURN 0;
   END
   GO
   ```

1. Register the custom script on the Publisher.

   ```sql
   USE [PublisherDB];
   GO

   EXECUTE sp_register_custom_scripting
       @type = 'delete',
       @value = 'script_custom_delete',
       @publication = 'PubName1',
       @article = 'Purchases';
   GO
   ```

1. Add a subscription. In this example, the `@sync_type` parameter is set to `replication support only`, so no snapshot is used.

   ```sql
   USE [PublisherDB];
   GO

   EXECUTE sp_addsubscription
       @publication = N'PubName1',
       @subscriber = @@SERVERNAME,
       @destination_db = N'SubscriberDB',
       @subscription_type = N'Push',
       @sync_type = N'replication support only',
       @article = N'all',
       @update_mode = N'read only',
       @subscriber_type = 0;
   GO
   ```

## Use a script that contains a new custom procedure definition

When you execute [sp_addarticle](../../system-stored-procedures/sp-addarticle-transact-sql.md), set the *@schema_option* `0x02` bit to `false` so replication doesn't automatically generate custom procedures at the Subscriber.

Before each schema change, create a new script file and register the script with replication by executing [sp_register_custom_scripting](../../system-stored-procedures/sp-register-custom-scripting-transact-sql.md). Specify a value of `custom_script` for the *@type* parameter, and the path to the script on the Publisher for the *@value* parameter.

The next time a relevant schema change is made, this script executes on each Subscriber within the same transaction as the DDL command. After the schema change is made, the script is unregistered. You must re-register the script to have it execute after a subsequent schema change.

## Related content

- [Transactional Articles - Specify How Changes Are Propagated](transactional-articles-specify-how-changes-are-propagated.md)
- [Make Schema Changes on Publication Databases](../publish/make-schema-changes-on-publication-databases.md)
