---
title: Debug Database Objects
description: Find out how to debug stored procedures, functions, and triggers. See how to turn on debugging, set breakpoints, and run a SQL Server unit test in debug mode.
author: dzsquared
ms.author: drskwier
ms.reviewer: randolphwest
ms.date: 09/09/2025
ms.service: sql
ms.subservice: ssdt
ms.topic: how-to
ms.custom:
  - sfi-ropc-nochange
---

# How to: Debug database objects

A SQL Server unit test consists:

- Unit test code written in C# or Visual Basic. This code, which is generated by the SQL Server Unit Test Designer, is responsible for submitting the Transact-SQL script that forms the body of the test.

- One or more test conditions, which are written in C# or Visual Basic. To debug test conditions, follow the procedure for debugging a unit test as described in [How to: Debug while a Test Is Running (Visual Studio 2010)](/previous-versions/visualstudio/visual-studio-2010/ms182484(v=vs.100)) or [How to: Debug while a Test Is Running (Visual Studio 2012)](/previous-versions/ms182484(v=vs.140)).

- One or more Transact-SQL scripts that run on objects in the database that you're testing. You can't debug these Transact-SQL scripts.

The procedures in this article describe how to debug particular database objects, such as stored procedures, functions, and triggers in the database you're testing. To debug a database object, follow these procedures in this order:

1. Enable SQL Server debugging on your test project.
1. Enable application debugging on the SQL Server instance that hosts the database you're testing.
1. Set breakpoints in the Transact-SQL script of the database objects you're debugging.
1. Debug your unit test. In this procedure, you run the test in debug mode.

## Enable SQL Debugging on your test project

1. Open **Solution Explorer**.

1. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click the test project, and select **Properties**.

   A properties page that has the same name as the test project opens.

1. On the properties page, select **Debug**.

1. Under **Enable Debuggers**, select **Enable SQL Server debugging**.

1. Save your changes.

## Set an increased execution context timeout to enable debugging for your test project

1. On the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and select **File**.

1. Browse to the folder that contains your test project, and double-click the `app.config` file.

   The `app.config` file opens in the editor.

1. Modify the `ExecutionContext` node to add a command timeout, as in the following example:

   ```xml
   <ExecutionContext
       CommandTimeout ="300" Provider="System.Data.SqlClient"
       ConnectionString="Data Source=TargetServerName\TargetInstanceName;Initial Catalog=TargetDatabaseName;Integrated Security=True;Pooling=False" />
   ```

1. Save your changes.

1. Rebuild your unit test project.

> [!IMPORTANT]  
> If you don't rebuild your project, the changes that you made to `app.config` aren't applied when you run your unit tests, and debugging fails.

## Add breakpoints to your Transact-SQL script

1. On the **View** menu, open **SQL Server Object Explorer**.

1. Under **Data Connections**, expand the node of the database that you want to test.

1. If a small red 'x' appears next to the icon of the database, the connection to the database is closed. In this case, right-click the database, and select **Refresh**. You might have to supply credentials to open the connection to the database.

1. Expand the **Views**, **Stored Procedures**, or **Functions** node to find the object that you want to debug.

1. Double-click the object that you want to debug.

1. Select the gray sidebar to set a breakpoint.

## Debug your SQL Server unit test

1. Visual Studio 2010, open the (**Test** > **Windows**) **Test View** window. In Visual Studio 2012, open the **Test Explorer** window.

1. Right-click the test whose Transact-SQL script exercises the database object in which you set breakpoints and select **Debug Selection**.

   The test runs in debug mode until a breakpoint in the database object is encountered.

1. (Optional) To open another debug window, open the **Debug** menu, point to **Windows**, and select **Breakpoints**, **Output**, or **Immediate**.

## Related content

- [Run SQL Server unit tests](running-sql-server-unit-tests.md)
- [Debugging Transact-SQL (Visual Studio 2010)](/previous-versions/visualstudio/visual-studio-2010/zefbf0t6(v=vs.100))
